
# Terraform Data Sources 

## What is a Data Source?

data sources allow you to read existing resources or dynamic information provided by Cloud Provider. This helps you reference resources created outside of Terraform.

---

## Syntax

```hcl
data "<PROVIDER>_<TYPE>" "<NAME>" {
  # Configuration arguments
}
```

You can reference a data source using:

```hcl
${data.<PROVIDER>_<TYPE>.<NAME>.<ATTRIBUTE>}
```

---

## Example 1: Fetching an Existing GCP Compute Instance

```hcl
data "google_compute_instance" "my_instance" {
  name   = "my-instance"
  zone   = "us-central1-a"
}

output "instance_id" {
  value = data.google_compute_instance.my_instance.id
}
```

This example retrieves the details of an existing Google Cloud compute instance and outputs the instance ID.

---

## Example 2: Fetching a GCP VPC

```hcl
data "google_compute_network" "default" {
  name = "default"
}

output "vpc_id" {
  value = data.google_compute_network.default.id
}
```

This example fetches the details of an existing VPC network in Google Cloud and outputs the network ID.

---

## Example 3: Fetching a GCP Firewall Rule

```hcl
data "google_compute_firewall" "default_ssh" {
  name    = "default-allow-ssh"
  network = data.google_compute_network.default.id
}

output "firewall_id" {
  value = data.google_compute_firewall.default_ssh.id
}
```

This example fetches a firewall rule and outputs its ID. It references the existing VPC network data source for associating the firewall with the network.

---

## Example 4: Fetching GCP Project Metadata

```hcl
data "google_project_metadata" "default" {
  project = "my-gcp-project"
}

output "project_metadata" {
  value = data.google_project_metadata.default.items["ssh-keys"]
}
```

This example fetches project metadata from a specific GCP project. It accesses the SSH keys stored in the project metadata.

---

## Example 5: Fetching GCP Storage Bucket

```hcl
data "google_storage_bucket" "my_bucket" {
  name = "my-gcs-bucket"
}

output "bucket_location" {
  value = data.google_storage_bucket.my_bucket.location
}
```

This example fetches the location of an existing GCS bucket and outputs the location.

---

## When to Use Data Sources in GCP

- To reference resources that are managed outside of Terraform.
- To access existing Google Cloud infrastructure or dynamic values (e.g., storage bucket, firewall rules, VPC networks).
- To automate workflows that integrate with other cloud services.

---

## Best Practices

- Use data sources to avoid hardcoding resource details.
- Leverage data sources with `locals` for cleaner code.
- Use descriptive names for data blocks.

---

Data sources in GCP help integrate and reference resources across various cloud services, making your Terraform configurations more dynamic and flexible.